A 23 year old white male with a 4 year history of Crohn's disease presented with an acute two day history of malaise, fever, abdominal pain, vomiting and stomal diarrhoea.
He complained of joint pains affecting the shoulders, elbows, wrists, metacarpophalangeals, knees and ankles.
There was also a rash on the elbows, ankles and feet, which began as erythematous macules and evolved to vesico-pustular lesions followed by crusting.
There was no history of sexual exposure or any intercurrent infection.
He was on no regular medication, but had discontinued Pentasa 4 months earlier.
One month earlier he had undergone a laparotomy to excise a complex ileo-cutaneous fistula with blind tracts, and two weeks earlier a defunctioning ileostomy had been created in view of persistent abdominal pain.
The cutaneous fistula had been present for a year, but was associated with a terminal ileal stricture and ileo-rectal fistula of at least 2 years duration.
His bowel disease had been resistant to immunosuppressive drugs including azathioprine, corticosteroiods and three infusions of Infliximab a year earlier.
There had been no extra-intestinal manifestations.
On admission to the hospital, he was thin, afebrile with a resting tachycardia of 125/minute.
The rest of the cardio-respiratory examination was normal.
The abdomen was minimally tender around the ileostomy without guarding or rebound tenderness.
Examination of the skin revealed some pustules and crusts around the elbows, ankles and feet (Fig 1 and  2).
The buttocks were spared.
There were clinical signs of synovitis of the wrists, proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints, and also both ankles.
Results of the laboratory tests showed a haemoglobin of 13.1 gm/dl, white blood count 15.8 × 109/L, platelets 585 × 109/L, C- reactive protein 37.7 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 69 mm/hr.
Urea and electrolytes, complement, urine analysis and microscopy were normal.
Rheumatoid factor, antinuclear and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, cryoglobulins and Hepatitis B and C serology were negative.
Transthoracic echocardiogram showed no signs of endocarditis, and multiple blood cultures were sterile.
A skin biopsy from the ankle revealed a perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with prominent neutrophils and associated fibrinoid necrosis of vessels consistent with 'leukocytoclastic' vasculitis.
He was commenced on 60 mg prednisolone per day leading to prompt and complete resolution of all features.
The dose of prednisolone was rapidly tapered over the course of one month by the patient, faster than advised but without any recurrence over the following 3 years.
A 30-year-old female (65 kg) underwent rhinoplasty under general anaesthesia, which was induced using a combination of a bolus of Remifentanyl (0.5 μg/kg) and Propofol 2 mg/kg.
Muscle paralysis was obtained with Cisatracurium (0.15 μg/kg).
Transoral intubation was performed with a Macintosh blade (No.3) and a size 7 mm diameter reinforced tracheal tube was easily and gently placed in the trachea, on the first attempt and was then fixed to the right corner of the mouth.
No problems were encountered during laryngoscopy and intubation.
The cuff of the tube was inflated with a pressure ≤ 20 cm H2O.
No adjustment of cuff volume was made intra-operatively.
N2O was not used for inhalation anaesthesia.
The throat pack was placed in the pharynx to avoid the passage of blood in the aero-digestive tract.
General anaesthesia was maintained with Sevofluorane in oxygen/air and Remifentanyl in continuous infusion 0.25 μg/kg/min.
Moderate arterial hypotension was maintained with a cuff systolic artery pressure of approximately 90 mmHg.
The operation was carried out in a semi-supine position with the head slightly inclined forward and laterally and trunk slightly elevated.
Duration of the operation was 100 minutes.
The patient was extubated, after removal of the throat pack without problems.
The following day the patient complained of difficulty in swallowing, dysphonia and hoarseness.
Examination revealed deviation of the tongue to the right side and vocal cord paralysis, expression of hypoglossal and recurrent laryngeal nerve injury without local oedema or haematoma.
The movements of the pharynx and soft palate were normal.
Meticulous neurological examination, including also magnetic resonance imaging (MRN) revealed no other evidence of central or cranial nerve involvement.
Conservative management included steroids, vitamins together with speech and swallowing therapy.
Full recovery of lingual and laryngeal functions was obtained within four months after surgery.
Here, we describe another case in a 60-year-old man from San Francisco who had consumed raw pork while traveling in the Philippines.
In June 2003, this man became ill with fever, diaphoresis, headache, nausea, and anorexia.
He had just returned from a 7-month vacation in the Philippines.
Three days after symptoms onset, his physician prescribed doxycycline.
Symptoms continued and he was admitted to a local hospital 5 days later with a fever of 38.9°C, nuchal rigidity, headache, and general malaise.
The patient described no recent contact with sick persons; past medical history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, he was somnolent but fully oriented, with no focal findings on neurologic examination and only slight nuchal rigidity.
He had a leukocyte count of 21,000/mm3, including 16,400/mm3 neutrophils.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed leukocyte count of 487/μL with 80% polymorphonuclear cells and 18% lymphocytes, and glucose and protein levels <20 mg/dL and <167 mg/dL, respectively.
Gram stain of CSF showed gram-positive cocci in pairs (Figure).
Empiric therapy (ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and ampicillin) for bacterial meningitis was begun.
Computed tomographic scan of the head showed only sinusitis; findings of chest radiograph and transesophageal echocardiogram were negative.
On hospital day 2, blood cultures grew gram-positive cocci in pairs and chains.
The organism was catalase-negative, bile esculin-negative, and pyrrolidonyl aminopeptidase-negative, consistent with Streptococcus spp.
A latex agglutination test did not detect Streptococcus pneumoniae antigen.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing showed that the isolate was sensitive to penicillin (MIC = 0.03), ceftriaxone, and vancomycin but resistant to tetracycline and clindamycin.
Antimicrobial therapy was changed to penicillin G, 24 million units intravenously per day.
On hospital day 5, the patient complained of hearing loss in his left ear.
Results of nasopharyngeal endoscopy were negative.
By hospital day 7, the organism was identified by the API 20 Strep System (bioMerieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France), as S. suis serotype 2.
The patient subsequently stated that he was a butcher with a culinary preference for partially cooked pork, which he had eaten in the Philippines until the week prior to onset of symptoms.
On hospital day 9, a formal audiology evaluation showed severe bilateral sensorineural high-frequency hearing loss (–70 dB).
The patient completed a 10-day course of parenteral antimicrobial drugs and was discharged on continued oral therapy with close followup.
Two months after discharge, the patient reported much improved hearing without other sequelae.
A 74-year-old man was referred to our hospital in November 2000 because of liver dysfunction detected during a medical checkup.
The patient had been diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome in 1995.
Laboratory examinations showed elevated serum hepatobiliary enzymes and IgM, and the presence of antimitochondrial antibodies.
Serologic markers for Hepatitis B and C viruses were negative.
Histopathologic examination of a liver biopsy specimen obtained at laparoscopy revealed non-suppurative destructive cholangitis in the portal area (Figure ​1).
The diagnosis of PBC (Scheuer stage 3) was confirmed and ursodeoxycholic acid, 900 mg daily, was started.
In January and June 2002, the patient underwent endoscopic variceal ligation plus endoscopic injection sclerotherapy as well as argon plasma coagulation for worsening esophageal varices.
In September 2007, the patient was admitted for the treatment of recurrent esophageal varices.
The platelet count had ranged between 52 × 109/L and 69 × 109/L for several years, but it was noted to decrease from 61 × 109/L in June 2007 to 8 × 109/L just before admission.
Before the deterioration of thrombocytopenia, the patient had no infectious diseases and received no other medication.
On admission, the patient had neither purpura nor bleeding episodes.
Table 1 shows the laboratory data on admission.
The platelet-associated IgG level was markedly high.
Bone marrow biopsy revealed normocellular marrow without cellular atypia.
Ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a cirrhotic liver with splenomegaly, ascites, and gallstones.
The spleen size had remained unchanged from previous imaging examinations.
Based on these findings, the association of PBC (decompensated liver cirrhosis) with ITP was diagnosed.
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genotyping determined by polymerase chain reaction-sequencing-based typing or polymerase chain reaction-sequence specific primers (SRL, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) detected A*02010101, B*400201, C*030401, C*07020101, DPB1*0501, DQA1*0103, DQA1*030101, DQB1*030201, DQB1*060101, DRB1*080201, and DRB1*080302.
The 13C urea breath test for H pylori infection was negative.
Figure ​2 shows the clinical course.
Oral prednisolone, 30 mg daily, for ITP was started on day 11, and diuretic therapy combined with albumin infusion for ascites was performed.
As the platelet count did not increase notably, pulse therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone, 1 g daily, was added on d 22 to 24.
However, the response was weak and temporary.
On d 31, mild melena was identified.
The patient was given a trial of intravenous immune gamma globulin therapy, 25 g daily, on d 32 to 36, combined with a second round of intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy on d 32 to 34.
Because a moderate response was observed, prednisolone was continued, and the platelet count increased slowly.
The ascites was relatively well controlled with diuretics at discharge.
Considering the decompensated liver cirrhosis and the platelet count, we determined the patient required careful follow-up of esophageal varices without prophylactic endoscopic therapy.
An 18-year-old male was diagnosed with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in 2005.
He was overweight with a body mass index (BMI) of 40.
He was started on quetiapine fumarate (Seroquel®) 900 mg daily in April 2005 and methylphenidate (Concerta®) 54 mg daily in September 2005.
In the beginning of August 2006 he was admitted to his local hospital with severe dyspnoea, tachypnea, tachycardia, and cyanosis.
On admission the blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, and the arterial blood gas revealed a pH of 7.45, pCO2 of 3.55 kPa, paO2 of 7.76 kPa, and BE of −5.1 mmol/l.
C-reactive protein was not elevated.
The chest X-ray showed an enlarged heart.
He developed hemoptysis and was treated with unfractionated heparin in suspicion of pulmonary embolism.
He subsequently developed cardiogenic shock and was treated with vasoactive drugs.
In spite of the treatment he became oliguric and his liver enzymes were rising.
He was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
On admission the blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, despite infusion with noradrenaline.
His heart rate was 130/minute and his temperature was 38.4 °C.
A thoracic computed tomography scan did not show pulmonary embolism.
Echocardiography revealed biventricular failure and left ventricular end diastolic diameter was 7 cm.
The left ventricle was severely hypokinetic with an ejection fraction (EF) of 20%–25%.
The left ventricular end diastolic pressure was markedly elevated, and there was a moderate mitral regurgitation.
Intermittent hemodialysis was initiated.
His liver function improved slightly, but despite dialysis the renal function deteriorated with increasing creatinine values.
After three days there was a further worsening of the left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 10%–12% and marked pulmonary hypertension with systolic pulmonary pressure estimated to 30 mmHg.
The clinical picture resembled dilated cardiomyopathy with low output failure causing renal and liver failure.
We suspected drug-induced cardiomyopathy and methylphenidate and quetiapine fumarate were discontinued.
Screening for infectious pathogens, immunological markers, and iron or amyloid deposition were all negative.
After three days he was transferred to the National Hospital (Rikshospitalet, Oslo) with ongoing noradrenaline and dobutamine infusions.
Shortly after admission an intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted and noradrenaline was replaced by nitroprusside.
Coronary angiography was normal.
Endomyocardial biopsy from the right ventricle did not reveal any distinct myocardial pathology.
On treatment with IABP, nitroprusside, and dialysis, the clinical situation gradually improved and the liver function returned to normal.
His renal function also improved with increasing diuresis and creatinine fell from 798 to 98 μmol/l.
His EF was still markedly reduced (15%).
Because of behavioral problems and adipose stature, he was denied a heart transplant.
He was treated with IABP for 26 days, and after 28 days he was transferred back to our hospital.
At that time his liver and renal functions were normal.
He was treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitor, a beta-blocker, and diuretics.
During the following two weeks his clinical status improved and he was subsequently discharged to his home.
The echocardiography still showed markedly dilated left ventricle with EF of 20%.
In March 2007, his clinical status was improved and he was in function class II (New York Heart Association) with an EF estimated by echocardiography to 30%–35%.
